# Meltdown Part 1: the Diner on the A486

Susan runs the Diner on the A486, a busy roadside cafe for hungry travellers to grab a bite to eat on their way to work or holidays. Back when her dad ran the place, the kitchen was just a one-person operation. People would come in, place their order, her dad would cook each meal one-by-one, and then serve up when it was ready. They would eat their meal, and afterwards her dad would come out to ask if they wanted anything else -- he did a good chocoalte sponge that was always popular with the locals. 

Over the years, more folks heard about Diner on the A486, it grew more and more, and one day Susan took over the running of it. Since her dad's days running the place, Susan had taken on some more staff to help out -- now there was a dedicated chef, as well as the landlady running the bar, and a waiter to take the orders and serve the food. With more people working at the diner, more customers were being served and business was doing well. Instead of the old days where her dad was doing the work of watier, cook, and server; where he would take the order for and cook each meal one by one, there was now a much more efficient system in place. While the chef was cooking one meal, the waiter was already asking the next table for their order, and clearing the plates away from another. Diners got their food more quickly, as soon as the chef had finished cooking it.  

One day, Susan decided to invent an even more efficent system for serving food to hungry diners. With this new system Diner on the A486 would be the fastest eatery this side of Aberystwyth, she was sure of it. 

Susan had already hired a few more chefs recently -- two working on main courses, and one cooking desserts. But often she had noticed that the chefs were spending a lot of time waiting around waiting for something to happen, such as a new food order ticket to come in from one of the (now many) waiters. Susan knew her chefs were working hard and fast when they had work to do, but seemed to spend a lot of time idle when there was a quiet period. 

The food is good and hearty at DOTA486, and diners don't always know if they'll have room for dessert after a big main course. So the waiters only come back to ask if anyone would like dessert after the main course plates have been cleared away. But Susan's spotted dick and custard is one of the most popular treats on the menu, and as soon as diners see it on the menu, they almost always are tempted to try it (and always seem to find room). In fact, Susan has been keeping track of how many diners order this delicious dessert after their meal, and 9 times out of 10, the waiter is sent off to the kitchen to place the order with the chefs. 
